Question 2 – Secure Project Workspace Setup

A project team requires a secure workspace for storing project files and documentation. Create the workspace and configure appropriate permissions.

I've performed the necessary tasks and prepared a report containing:


1. Directory structure created

Commands:
mkdir -p ~/Question2 
cd ~/Question2
mkdir ProjectWorkspace
cd ProjectWorkspace
mkdir Documents Reports

Observation: The mkdir command was used to create the ProjectWorkspace directory along with the Documents and Reports subdirectories. The commands executed successfully and created the required directory structure for storing project files and documentation. Organizing files into separate directories helps improve project management and file accessibility.

Directory structure verification: 
Command: tree 

coder@Ubuntu:~/Question2/ProjectWorkspace$ tree
Output:
Command 'tree' not found, but can be installed with:
sudo snap install tree  # version 2.1.3+pkg-5852, or
sudo apt install tree   # version 2.1.1-2ubuntu3.24.04.2
See 'snap info tree' for additional versions.
Observation: The tree command was not available on the system because the package was not installed. Therefore, the ls -R command was used as an alternative to display the directory hierarchy recursively. This provided the necessary verification of the workspace structure.

Command: ls -R
coder@Ubuntu:~/Question2/ProjectWorkspace$ ls -R
Output: 
.:
Documents  Reports

./Documents:

./Reports:

Observation: The ls -R command displayed the contents of the current directory and all subdirectories recursively. The output confirmed that the Documents and Reports directories were created successfully inside ProjectWorkspace. This verified that the required workspace structure was correctly configured.


2. File permissions before and after modification

Permissions before modification: 
Command: ls -ld .
coder@Ubuntu:~/Question2/ProjectWorkspace$ ls -ld .
Output: drwxrwxr-x 4 coder coder 4096 Jun 21 19:17 
Observation: The ls -ld command displayed the permissions, owner, and group associated with the workspace directory. The permission string drwxrwxr-x indicates that the owner and group had read, write, and execute permissions, while other users had read and execute permissions only. These permissions were assigned according to the system's default configuration and umask value.

Ownership details: 
Command: ls -ld .
Output: drwxrwxr-x 4 coder coder 4096 Jun 21 19:17 
Observation: The output showed that the directory owner is "coder" and the associated group is also "coder". Ownership determines which user has control over the directory and can modify permissions. Proper ownership management is important for maintaining file security and access control.

Umask value used:
Command: umask
Output: 0002
Observation: The umask value of 0002 was displayed. This value affects the default permissions assigned to newly created files and directories by removing specific permission bits. It allows group write access while restricting certain permissions for security purposes.


permission modification:
Command: chmod 750 .
Observation: The chmod 750 command was used to modify the permissions of the ProjectWorkspace directory. This configuration grants full access to the owner, read and execute access to members of the group, and no access to other users. The command executed successfully and improved the security of the workspace.


permissions after modification:
Command: ls -ld .
Output: drwxr-x--- 4 coder coder 4096 Jun 21 19:17
Observation: The output confirmed that the permissions were successfully changed to drwxr-x---. The owner retains full control of the directory, group members have limited access, and all access for other users has been removed. This configuration provides stronger protection for project data.


Created a file: 
Commands: 
touch Documents/project_plan.txt 
ls -l Documents

coder@Ubuntu:~/Question2/ProjectWorkspace$ touch Documents/project_plan.txt
coder@Ubuntu:~/Question2/ProjectWorkspace$ ls -l Documents

Output:
total 0
-rw-rw-r-- 1 coder coder 0 Jun 21 19:22 project_plan.txt

Observation: The touch command created an empty file named project_plan.txt inside the Documents directory. The ls -l command verified that the file was created successfully and displayed its permissions, ownership, and size information. This demonstrates how project-related documents can be stored within the secure workspace.


5. Explanation of how permissions protect project data 
Conclusion: Linux permissions protect project data by controlling which users can read, modify, or execute files and directories. By assigning permission 750 to the workspace, only the owner has full access, group members have limited access, and all other users are denied access. This helps prevent unauthorized viewing, modification, or deletion of important project resources and improves overall system security.


Check the screenshots showing permissions and ownership.
