Question 3 – File System and Link Analysis

A developer accidentally deleted a file and wants to understand how Linux links work.

I have created a file, hard link, and symbolic link and investigated their behavior.

The report contains:
1. Inode numbers of all files
2. Comparison between hard link and symbolic link
3. Effect of deleting the original file
4. Metadata collected using Linux utilities
5. Conclusions drawn from the experiment

Creating the original file: 
Command: echo "trying to understand how Linux links work" > original.txt
Observation: A text file named original.txt was created successfully. This file served as the source file for both the hard link and symbolic link experiments.

Creating a hard link: 
Command: ln original.txt hardlink.txt
Observation: A hard link named hardlink.txt was created. Hard links reference the same inode as the original file and therefore point directly to the file data.

Creating a symbolic link: 
Command: ln -s original.txt symlink.txt
Observation: A symbolic link named symlink.txt was created. Symbolic links store the path of the target file rather than sharing the inode.


Inode analysis: 
Command: ls -li
Output: 
Observation:
The inode numbers showed that original.txt and hardlink.txt shared the same inode number, while symlink.txt had a different inode number. This demonstrates the fundamental difference between hard links and symbolic links.


Metadata collection:
Command:
stat original.txt
stat hardlink.txt
stat symlink.txt

Observation: The stat command displayed metadata such as inode numbers, permissions, ownership, file size, and timestamps. The metadata confirmed that the hard link and original file referred to the same inode.


Effect of deleting the original file: 
Command:
rm original.txt

Observation:
The original file was deleted from the directory. This allowed investigation of how the hard link and symbolic link behaved after removal of the source file.


Hard link behavior after deletion: 
Command: cat hardlink.txt

Observation: The contents of the file remained accessible through the hard link. Since the hard link references the same inode, the file data remains available even after deleting the original filename.


Symbolic link behavior after deletion: 
Command: cat symlink.txt

Observation: The symbolic link failed because it references the pathname of the original file. Once the original file was deleted, the symbolic link became a broken link.


# Comparison between hard link and symbolic link: 

Hard link: 
- Shares the same inode as the original file.
- Continues to work after the original file is deleted.
- Cannot normally span different file systems.

Symbolic link: 
- Has its own inode.
- Stores the path to the target file.
- Becomes invalid when the target file is deleted.
- Can link across file systems.

Conclusion: The experiment demonstrated that hard links and symbolic links behave differently at the file system level. Hard links reference the same inode and preserve access to the data after deletion of the original file, while symbolic links depend on the existence of the target path. Understanding these differences helps prevent data loss and improves file system management.

Check the screenshots of inode information and link behavior.

Summary of findings
